# 2.0 Migration Guide

We have heard and appreciate all of the feedback we've gotten over the past
year, and it is very clear: Ditto is maturing and developers want to build more
complex applications. To do that, Ditto needs to expose more of the internal
functionality so that developers have more flexibility and control. Ditto 2.0 is
the first step in that direction.

This is a migration guide that covers the most substantial changes that will
affect most users. For a comprehensive list of all deprecated and removed
methods, see the [changelog](/changelog).

## Android permissions

On Android, permissions have changed. Remove `android:maxSdkVersion="30"` from `ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION` and `ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION`.

```
    <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION" />
    <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION" />
 ```
 
## Explicit types

Types can now be made explicit. Ditto 2.0 introduces `DittoRegister` and
`Counter` as the first step:

### Counter

* `replaceWithCounter` is deprecated. Instead, use `DittoCounter()` and `increment(double)`
* Counters always start at 0

Counters are always initialized with no parameters in the constructor. This is
to encourage all mutations to happen within an `update` clause. This helps
behavior be more clear -- if you want to have a mutable type, you need to mutate
them using the methods available for that type.

```js
let id = collection.upsert({
  seat: '16c',
  drinks: DittoCounter(),
})
```

```js
collection.findById(id).update(doc => {
  doc.drinks.increment(1)
})
```
### DittoRegister

* Added `DittoRegister` to explicitly create Registers
* Added Map and Array to the list of valid register types

Map and Array are now valid register types. We call these *Complex Registers*.
Complex Registers allow you to query and access data as their fundamental type.
For example:

```swift
collection.find("array[0] == 1")
collection.find("map['b'] == 'c'")

coll.findByID(docID).update({ mutDoc in
  let one = mutDoc["array"][0]
}
```

However, updating a complex register is last writer wins for the entire type,
similar to a string or number. These types are useful for pulling data into
Ditto from external databases, where Ditto is rarely modifying that data
internally.

All of the following are valid uses of `DittoRegister` type:

```swift
let content: [String: Any?] = [
    "string": DittoRegister(value: "string in register"),
    "integer": DittoRegister(value: 123),
    "float": DittoRegister(value: 4.56),
    "bool": DittoRegister(value: false),
    "nested": [
        "inner": DittoRegister(value: "simple")
    ],
    "array": DittoRegister(value: [1, 2, 3]),
    "complex_array": DittoRegister(value: [[[["a": 42]]]]),
    "map": DittoRegister(value: ["b": "c"]),
    "complex_map": DittoRegister(value: ["d": ["e": ["f": [["four": 4, "five": 5]]]]])
]

let docID = try! collection.upsert(content)
```

All supported `DittoRegister` types are:

* String
* Numbers (Int, Float, etc)
* Boolean
* null
* Binary
* **Map** (new Complex Register)
* **Array** (new Complex Register)

### Updating a Register

* Only use `set(value)` or `remove()` a Register. Registers cannot be partially
updated.

For example, say you have a document that contains complex content that inserted
from a legacy database, where all values are registers. To modify a register:

```swift
coll.findByID(docID).update(mutDoc => {
  // This is ok. Retrieves the data at an index
  let one = mutDoc["array"][0]

  // To update the array
  let newArray = mutDoc["array"]
  newArray[0] = "foo \(one)"
  // To update the value
  mutDoc["array"].set(DittoRegister(value: newArray))
})
```

You can also update registers using `upsert` but you must not forget to always
wrap your new value with `DittoRegister()`:

```js
coll.upsert({
  "map": DittoRegister(value: newMap)
})
```

The following example code will change the type of your register to a map. Do
not do this.

```swift
coll.findByID(docID).update(mutDoc => {
  // This is not ok. You should not modify a register at an index or path.
  // You will lose any concurrent updates and the type will change.
  mutDoc["complex_map"]["d"]["e"] = "bananas"
}
```

### HTTP API

* The HTTP API will support explicit types through the `/api/v2/store/[method]` endpoint.
* The `/api/v1/store` endpoint is deprecated, and will become unsupported in
  Ditto 3.0.

To create and modify a Register Array, Register Map, or Counter in the HTTP API
for v2, use the `/api/v2/store/[method]` endpoint and annotate the value with the type
you intend to use.


*Endpoints*

* `/api/v2/store/write`
* `/api/v2/store/find`
* `/api/v2/store/findbyid`


#### Example

A full example with `curl` that shows how to use the HTTP API to create explicit
types. In this example, we create a `friends` key with a Register that is an
array, and `orderCount` which is a counter.

We use the `counter` override by adding the following key to the payload:

```
"valueTypeOverrides": {
  "orderCount": "counter",
  "friends": "register"
}
```

In v2, Arrays are registers by default. That means you do not need to add
`register` to the `valueTypeOverrides` payload, but you can if you want to be
explicit.

```
curl -X POST 'https://{app_id}.cloud.ditto.live/api/v2/store/write' \
  --header 'X-DITTO-CLIENT-ID: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABQ==' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-raw '{
      "commands": [{
        "method": "upsert",
        "collection": "people",
        "id": "123abc",
        "value": {
          "name": "John",
          "friends": ["Susan"],
          "orderCount": 5
        },
        "valueTypeOverrides": {
          "orderCount": "counter"
        }
      }]
  }'
```

To find this document you can use `/api/v2/store/findbyid`:
```
curl --location --request POST '483acae0-035a-43f2-afa9-2d28239ad721.cloud.ditto.live/api/v2/store/findbyid' \
--header 'X-DITTO-CLIENT-ID: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABQ==' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data-raw '{
  "collection": "people",
  "id": "123abc"
}'
```

```
{
  "collection": "people",
  "id": "123abc"
}
```

Optionally, When you query for this data using `/api/v2/store/find`, you can use the key `serializedAs: latestValuesAndTypes` to receive a response with each
type specified:

Request:
```
curl -X POST 'https://{app_id}.cloud.ditto.live/api/v2/store/find' \
  --header 'X-DITTO-CLIENT-ID: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABQ==' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-raw '{
    "collection": "people",
    "query": "name=='John'",
    "limit": 2,
    "serializedAs": "latestValuesAndTypes"
}'
```

Response: 

```json
{
  "value": {
    "_id": "123abc",
    "fields": {
      "name": {
          "register": { "value": "John" },
      },
      "friends": {
          "register": { "value": ["Susan"] },
      },
      "orderCount": {
          "counter": { "value": 5 }
      },
    }
  }
}
```

## CDC

*This feature is only available on Dedicated Clusters*

If you're using Ditto's CDC (Change Data Capture), such as a Kafka connector,
you can upgrade to a `v2` topic to start getting information about explicit
types. For example, if you create a `DittoRegister` using Ditto v2, you'll get a
type annotation similar to the HTTP response. Contact your support engineer for
more information.

## Growable arrays

* The [Growable Array](https://docs.ditto.live/android/common/datamodel/array)
  is deprecated.
* `.push()` and `.pop()` and `array[index].remove()` are deprecated.

RGAs will be entirely unsupported in Ditto 3.0, so it is important that you
start migrating away from using Growable Arrays and start using a
[DittoRegister](#dittoregister) or a [Map](../datamodel/map/) instead.

We may bring back the Growable Array in 2023 for text editing. However, we do
not see the demand for Growable Arrays right now, so we decided to deprecate it
for the time being. Please reach out through the help center on the bottom right
of your screen if you are interested in Growable Arrays. We would love to hear
about your use case.

## `insert`

`insert` and `insertWithStrategy` have been removed from the `Collection` type.
You should instead use `upsert` or `upsert_with_strategy`.

If you were previously providing a document identifier to an `insert` call then
you should instead provide it to the `upsert` call by specifying it under an
`_id` key at the root of the value passed to the `upsert` call.

## Write strategy

* Ditto 2.0 will remove support for the `overwrite` write strategy.


## Sync limits

In 1.x `findAll().limit(10)` would not limit replication by default. This would
cause small peers to crash if they accidentally pulled down more data from the
Big Peer than their platform or hardware could handle.

```js
veryLargeCollection.findAll().limit(10).observe(callback) // CRASH!!!!
```

In the 2.0, `limit(10)` will only replicate 10 documents as expected.

```js
veryLargeCollection.findAll().limit(10).observe(callback) // OK
```


## Forward-compatibility with concurrent types

* It is valid to use multiple types concurrently at the same document path.

Distributed applications typically only add new fields and never remove or
modify existing fields in production. Despite these validation code paths, bugs
happen. It could be possible to have a version of your application that changed
the type of a field that an older application version is using. This would break
the *forward-compatibility* of your software. This could cause a crash in
production if an application version is expecting a different shape to your
data.

If this happens, Ditto 2.0's concurrent types ensure that data is never lost and
that old code can still work with new data. Devices can always access all types
that have been added to a particular field. Ditto does its best to preserve
data, even if the type was changed by another, incompatible version of your
application. This feature allows you to more easily build forward-compatibile
applications.

It is another tool that Ditto gives you so that you can manage schema changes
more robustly, and reduce the chance of data loss or crashes in production.


Device A

```swift
try! coll.upsert(["edited_by": "john"])
```

Device B
```swift
try! coll.upsert(["edited_by": ["timestamp": 16827219234, "user_id": "abc123"])
```

After synchronization

```swift
const doc = coll.findByID(docID)
doc["edited_by"].value // latest timestamp: ["timestamp": ..., "user_id": ...]
doc["edited_by"].dictionaryValue // ["timestamp": ..., "user_id": ...]
doc["edited_by"].stringValue // "john"
```

## JavaScript changes

The JS document API changes substantially with Ditto v2. In v1, we've proxied
instances of `Document` and `MutableDocument` allowing us to make accessing and
updating contents of a document feel as simple as manipulating a regular
JavaScript object.

This "magic", however, led to many edge cases, inconsistencies, and confusion.
Together with the introduction of explicit CRDT types in v2, we've taken the
opportunity and redesigned the JS document API to be more explict and align with
the APIs of the other Ditto SDKs.

### Accessing document content

To access and update the contents of a document, you'll now mainly interact with
`DocumentPath` and `MutableDocumentPath` instances directly. Given a document,
you can get the corresponding path object via the `.path` property:

```js
const collection = ditto.store.collection('abc')
const document = await collection.findByID('123')
const path = await document.path
```

This `path` instance represents the document content at the root. With that, you
can access a property at a specific key-path via the `at()` method, which yields
another path instance representing the document content at that key-path:

```js
// Both are equivalent, the latter is a little more efficient:
const pathDeepDown1 = document.path.at('deep').at('down')
const pathDeepDown2 = document.path.at('deep.down')
```

Since this is so common, `Document` and `MutableDocument` offer a convenience
method `at()`, which is equivalent to `path.at()`, so the above becomes:

```js
const pathDeepDown3 = document.at('deep.down')
```

With that, we can now access the `value` of a property at a given key-path,
regardless of the underlying CRDT type:

```js
const name = document.at('deep.down.name').value
```

Or the value for a specific CRDT type:

```js
const name = document.at('deep.down.name').register.value
const count = document.at('deep.down.count').counter.value
const count = document.at('deep.down.elements').rga.value
// ...
```

### Updating document content

There are only 2 update operations accessible via a `MutableDocumentPath`
object: `set()` & `remove()`. `set()` allows you to create a property with a
specific CRDT type, while `remove()` allows you to remove that property:

```js
await collection.findByID('123').update((mutableDocument) => {
  mutableDocument.at('some.new.name').set(new Register(''))
  mutableDocument.at('some.existing.property').remove()
})
```

All other mutations, i.e. updating the value of an existing property, must be
performed via the operations offered by the corresponding (mutable) CRDT type:

```js
await collection.findByID('123').update((mutableDocument) => {
  mutableDocument.at('deep.down.name').register.set('Peter Pan')
  mutableDocument.at('deep.down.count').counter.increment(456)

  mutableDocument.at('deep.down.elements').rga.insertAt('some-element-789', 1)
  mutableDocument.at('deep.down.elements').rga.removeAt(0)
  mutableDocument.at('deep.down.elements').rga.push('some-element-abc')
  const last = mutableDocument.at('deep.down.elements').rga.pop()
  // ...
})
```
