# 3.0 Migration guide 

This is a migration guide that covers the most substantial
changes. For a comprehensive list of all deprecated and
removed methods, see the [changelog](/changelog).

## Replicated Growable Array (RGA) is removed from the API

In v2, the Replicated Growable Array (RGA) was deprecated. In v3, they are
entirely removed from the API. You'll still be able to read legacy RGA fields,
but not write to them.

## Observe will no longer implicitly create subscriptions

`observe` is now removed from the API. 

Instead, use `subscribe` and `observeLocal` together. If you
have `.observe()` double check that you are also subscribing to that data in an
application-wide Ditto manager object.

* If you want to sync something use `.subscribe()`. 
*  Use `observeLocal` to listen for changes and render documents in the user interface.

For example, if you have this code:

```swift
let liveQuery = collection.find(query).observe { (docs, event) in
   ...
}
```

You need to now expand this to be:

```swift
let subscription = collection.find(query).subscribe()
let liveQuery = collection.find(query).observeLocal { (docs, event) in
   ...
}
```

Further, it is best practice to separate your subscribe functions from observe. 

For example, you should create a DittoManager singleton to hold subscribe calls:

```swift
class DittoManager {

    var ditto: Ditto
    var subscription: DittoSubscription

    static var shared = DittoManager()

    init() {
        self.ditto = Ditto(identity: .onlinePlayground(appID: "MY_APP", token: "MY_TOKEN"))
        self.subscription = self.ditto.store["orders"].find(getOrdersQuery()).subscribe()
    }

    getOrdersQuery () {
        return "restaurantId == '\(MyApp.restaurantId)' && forScreen == '\(MyApp.deviceType)'"
    }
}

```

And use `observeLocal` in your ViewModel to watch whenever the device's database is updated with changes. Both local and remote changes will fire this callback.

```swift
class OrdersListViewModel: ObservableObject {
    @Published var orders = [Order]()

    init() {
        self.liveQuery = DittoManager.shared.ditto.store["orders"]
            .findAll()
            .observeLocal(eventHandler: {  docs, event in
                self.orders = docs.map({ Order(document: $0) })
            }
    }
}
```

## SiteIDs should not be used as an authentication mechanism

The SiteID property is deprecated. If you are using a SiteID, instead you should generate a random
identifier and save it in your application’s local user defaults or shared
preferences cache. 

## Swift changes

### Removal of Codable Support in DittoSwift

* The current Codable Support in v1 forced magic types with no escape hatch. There was no way to customize the _id field to a struct or class’s property name nor any ability to annotate that certain properties should behave like CRDTs. 
* Ditto v3 deprecates native Codable support.
* Native Codable support will be removed completely in v5, but there will be an alternative Codable implementation.

If you have a struct or class that you want to map to a Document, please start
populating the fields using our document accessors explicitly.  This is verbose
but will prepare your code for the removal of Codable support from our core
library.

```swift
class Car {
    var id: String
    var name: String
    var mileage: Int

    init(document: DittoDocument) {
        self.id = document.id.stringValue
        self.name = document["name"].register?.stringValue ?? ""
        self.mileage = document["mileage"].register?.intValue ?? 0
  }
}
```

## Android changes

All instances of ID are now Id. For example, `findByID` is now `findById`. For the full list of deprecations, see the [changelog](/changelog).
